doc: add guide for upgrading to v5 (#407)
CrunchyData/pgmonitor: hugo/content/changelog/v5_upgrade/_index.md

Reviewer: so this isn't an 'upgrade to 5.0' doc; it's a 'convert to sql_exporter' doc, no? if one chooses to stay w/ postgres_exporter in v5 then none of this applies, yes?

Author: postgres_exporter is marked as deprecated. So while you're technically right, I would actually like to leave it with this impression that it's part of moving to 5.0. Yes, they could stay, but they shouldn't.

Reviewer: fair

---
title: "Upgrading to pgMonitor v5.0.0"
draft: false
weight: 5
---

> Version 5 of pgMonitor introduces a new exporter that will be used for PostgreSQL. Converting to this new exporter will involve cleaning up the old postgres_exporter, updating Prometheus targets and installing new Grafana dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version 5 of pgMonitor introduces a new exporter that will be used for collecting PostgreSQL metrics. Converting to this new exporter will involve cleaning up the old postgres_exporter, updating Prometheus targets, and installing new Grafana dashboards.
```

## Cleanup

### postgres_exporter

> This new exporter for PostgreSQL allows for just a single exporter to connect to all databases within a PostgreSQL instance as well as connecting directly to PgBouncer to collect is metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new exporter for PostgreSQL allows for just a single exporter to connect to all databases within a PostgreSQL instance as well as connecting directly to PgBouncer to collect its metrics.
```

If you've installed pgMonitor with the packages provided by Crunchy Data, those packages can now be uninstalled as well. 

| Package Name                   | Description                                                               |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| pg_bloat_check                 | Package for pg_bloat_check script                                         |
| pgbouncer_fdw                  | Package for the pgbouncer_fdw extension                                   |
| pgmonitor-pg-common            | Package containing postgres_exporter items common for all versions of PostgreSQL |
| pgmonitor-pg##-extras          | Crunchy-optimized configurations for postgres_exporter. Note that each major version of PostgreSQL has its own extras package (pgmonitor-pg13-extras, pgmonitor-pg14-extras, etc) |
| postgres_exporter              | Base package for postgres_exporter                                        |

> Note that the pgbouncer_fdw is no longer required to monitor PgBouncer but it still can be used with sql_exporter if desired. If it is not needed, that package can be removed as well. Note that it is also an extension within the database and can be removed as follows. Per previous instructions, it was usually only installed on the global database.

Reviewer: it seems slightly weird to me that we make it this far before actually saying sql_exporter

Author: Will add mention of it to the first sentence above

Author: Done

> Note that the pgbouncer_fdw is no longer required to monitor PgBouncer but it still can be used with sql_exporter if desired. If it is not needed, that package can be removed as well. Note that it is also an extension within the database and can be removed as follows. Per previous instructions, it was usually only installed on the global database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the pgbouncer_fdw is no longer required to monitor PgBouncer but it can still be used with sql_exporter if desired. Per previous instructions, it was usually only installed on the global database. The extension can be removed as follows if it's not needed.
```

Reviewer 2: @keithf4

```
DROP EXTENSION pgbouncer_fdw;
```

> If postgres_exporter was not set up with packages, you can now manually remove all the related files. Note the ## is replaced with the major version of PG that was being monitored. It is possible that multiple versions of PG had been monitored and copies of these files could exist for all versions. Also the sysconfig files listed below are the defaults used in examples so there may be additional sysconfig files that were related to postgres_exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If postgres_exporter was not set up with packages, you can now manually remove all the related files. Note the ## is replaced with the major version of PG that was being monitored. It is possible that multiple versions of PG had been monitored and copies of these files could exist for all versions. Also, the sysconfig files listed below are the defaults used in examples; there may be additional postgres_exporter sysconfig files on your system(s).
```

| System Location |
|-----------------|
| /etc/postgres_exporter/  |
| /usr/lib/systemd/system/crunchy-postgres-exporter@.service  |
| /etc/sysconfig/postgres_exporter_pg##  |
| /etc/sysconfig/postgres_exporter_pg##_per_db  |
| /usr/bin/pgbackrest-info.sh |
| /etc/pgmonitor.conf |

### Prometheus

> All postgres_exporter Prometheus targets can now be removed. If alerting had been set up, they are all likely setting off alarms now that they had been shut down and removed during the previous step. This can make it easier to identify which targets can be removed. Otherwise, the default location for Prometheus targets used by previous instructions is `/etc/prometheus/auto.d/`. Please check your Prometheus installation for possible additional target locations. In that location, remove any targets for the postgres_exporter. The default ports for postgres_exporter were 9187 and 9188, so any targets with these ports should be examined for removal. Once this is done, you can simply reload Prometheus to clear these targets and any related alerts should clear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All postgres_exporter Prometheus targets can now be removed. The default location for Prometheus targets is `/etc/prometheus/auto.d/`, but please check your Prometheus installation for possible additional target locations. In the identified location(s), remove any targets for the postgres_exporter. The default ports for postgres_exporter were 9187 and 9188, so any targets with these ports should be examined for removal. Note that if alerting had previously been enabled, the previous step likely caused multiple alters to fire; once this step is done, you can simply reload Prometheus to clear these targets and any related alerts should resolve themselves. 
```

Author: I would like to have some note in here that the previous step of removing the exporter will likely have set off alerts

Author: @hunleyd Admit the wording on this is a little weak. Any suggestions?

Reviewer: how's that look now @keithf4 ?

```bash
sudo systemctl reload prometheus
```

> Any alerts related to postgres_exporter can also be removed from the files contained in the default alert files location `/etc/prometheus/alert-rules.d/`. Note the default original example alert file had been named `crunchy-alert-rules-pg.yml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any alerts related to postgres_exporter can also be removed from the files contained in the default alert files location `/etc/prometheus/alert-rules.d/`. Note the default example alert file had been named `crunchy-alert-rules-pg.yml`
```

### Grafana

> Version 5.x of pgMonitor ups the minimum required version of Grafana to 10.4. It also removed dashboards related to postgres_exporter and added new ones for sql_exporter. If you are simply using the dashboards provided by pgMonitor, the easiest method to update is to simply remove the old ones and install the new ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version 5.x of pgMonitor raises the minimum required version of Grafana to 10.4. It also removes dashboards related to postgres_exporter and adds new ones for sql_exporter. If you are simply using the dashboards provided by pgMonitor, the easiest method to update is to simply remove the old ones and install the new ones.
```

> If you are using Crunchy packages, simply uninstall the old packages. It's recommended to follow the non-package removal process below as well to ensure things are cleaned up properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using Crunchy-provided packages, simply uninstall the old packages. It's recommended to follow the non-package removal process below as well to ensure things are cleaned up properly.
```

| Package Name              | Description                                                       |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| pgmonitor-grafana-extras  | Crunchy configurations for datasource & dashboard provisioning    |

> If you didn't use the Crunchy packages, ensure the files in the following folder are removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you didn't use the Crunchy-provided packages, ensure the files in the following folder are removed:
```

```
| System Location |
|-----------------|
| /etc/grafana/crunchy_dashboards |
```

> ## Setup new sql_exporter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up sql_exporter
```

> At this point, you should just be able to follow the standard setup instructions for pgMonitor for sql_exporter, Prometheus & Grafana. This will setup the new exporter, Prometheus targets, and new Grafana dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, ollow the standard setup instructions for pgMonitor for sql_exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana. This will set up sql_exporter, the Prometheus targets, and the new Grafana dashboards.
```
'standard setup instructions' should be a hyperlink to said instructions

Author: Link added and reworded a bit
